Welcome back to our study of Proverbs, and we are in Proverbs chapter 7, and we are going to actually focus now on verses 19 through 21.
And let me read that text, and then we're going to go back and review a bit.
So in chapter 7 of Proverbs verses 19 through 21, the Bible says, for my husband is not at home,
He has gone on a long journey.
He has taken a bag of money with him.
At the full moon, he will come home.
With her many persuasions, she entices him with her flattering lips.
She seduces him.
Now here we're talking about, well, the book Proverbs is talking about the wayward woman, but we have used her as an example of the world and the way that the world tries to disrupt the Christian's life.
Now, what do I mean by world?
I want you to hold your place for just a moment and I want you to go to Ephesians chapter 2 because we need to clearly understand what I mean by the world coming against us as Christians and trying to get us to turn away from God.
What is the world?
Who is the world?
We all know that we live in the world
But what does the Bible mean by the world coming against the Christian?
If you look in Ephesians chapter 2, it says, and you were dead and your trespasses and sins in which you formerly walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the heir of the spirit that is now working in the sons of disobedience.
Among them we too all formerly lived in the lust of the flesh and the lust of our flesh,
indulging the desires of the flesh and of the mind and whereby nature, children of wrath, even as the rest.
The world in the Bible refers to every thought, every message, every philosophy, every deed, every action that is contrary to the will of God, that is contrary to the character of God.
there is a sense in which we were of the world before we became Christians.
And the people in this world who have yet to receive Christ as Lord and Savior are still in the world and they function according to the world.
And they even come against the believer knowingly or unknowingly and oftentimes cause them great damage by leading them into sin or leading them away from Christ.
So I want you to look, let's just look at this definition.
You were dead and your trespasses and sins.
All of us were born spiritually dead, unresponsive to the righteousness of God, unresponsive to the voice of God, but very responsive to this fallen world, to our own fallen flesh, to sin and even to the devil.
It says in verse two,
in which you formally walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air.
Outside of Christianity, outside of faith in Christ, outside of the true church, people live a certain way.
And the way that they live is almost atheistic or agnostic.
They live as though God did not exist.
Or if he does exist, he's not made himself known.
He's not made his commandments known.
Okay.
And so people live in a way that is contrary to the nature and will of God, but not only that, it says they live according to the prince of the power of the air of the spirit that is now working in the sons of disobedience.
This is a reference to the devil.
And so people are not only living in ignorance,
with regard to God, His nature and His will.
They're not only dead to God and unresponsive, but they're alive, not only to the lust of their flesh, but actually to the devil and the demonic, the spirits, the fallen spirits of this age.
They're responsive to them, and they're also activated by them.
So when a person sins, we know it is their fault, it is their doing.
but also behind it could be not only the temptation, but also the animation, power of the devil.
And because of this, everyone outside of Christ is referred to as a son of disobedience.
They belong to God in that he created them, but their lives are marked, not by obedience to the will of God, but by disobedience to the will of God.
And then verse three, he reminds us, you know, we need to be careful not to be self-righteous or to judge people outside of Christ.
Why?
Because we were also formally outside of Christ before we heard the gospel, repented of our sins and believed.
And we also followed the lust of our flesh, of our fallen flesh, and we indulged in the desires of the flesh and of the mind,
and we're by nature children of wrath.
Before someone becomes a Christian, it's not only that they do bad things, but their nature is fallen.
Their nature is morally corrupt, and it is from that corruption that the fruit of their life comes forth.
And we were a part of that, but now we are Christian.
And as Christian, as believers in Christ, our nature has been changed, our desires have been changed,
And because of that, our actions, our words, even our thoughts are changed.
And so in the world, what do we have?
We have two groups of people, those in Adam and outside of Christ and those who are in Christ, those who are in Christ seek to live a certain way according to the nature and will of God.
But those who are outside of Christ who have yet to believe, they live
they speak in a completely different way.
And they're not content just to be here alone, but they also desire to influence the believer.
You see, the believer is something of a thorn in their flesh.
The believer is something like a pebble in their shoe.
As the believer lives a righteous life, those in the world
are convicted about their own sin and they desire for that believer to stop it, to become like them.
And so what you need to understand young person is you live in a world where the majority of the people are not followers of Jesus Christ.
They live a completely different way because they think a completely different way because they have a completely different nature and they're always going to seek to be
and influence.
And to be honest with you, they have the greater control over all the mediums of influence.
They outpopulate us, number one, but also there is radio, television, internet, Instagram, social media, Twitter, the news, even the entertainment, it is all designed to draw the Christian away from Christ.
And so we need to be careful.
Okay.
Now let's go back.
Let's go back to Proverbs chapter six.
And I want to reread verses 10 through 21.
Remember this woman in our study is representing the world and the temptations of the world to get us to do unrighteousness.
And verse 10.
Behold, a woman comes to meet him dressed as a harlot and cunning of heart.
She is boisterous and rebellious.
Her feet do not remain at home.
She is now in the streets, now in the squares, and lurks by every corner.
So she seizes him and kisses him.
And with a brazen face, she says to him, I was due to offer peace offerings.
Today I've paid my vows.
Therefore, I have come out to meet you.
To seek your presence earnestly, and I have found you, and I have spread my couch with coverings, with colored linens of Egypt.
I have sprinkled my bed with mirth, aloes, and cinnamon.
Come let us drink our fill of love until morning.
Let us delight ourselves with caresses.
For my husband is not at home.
He has gone on a long journey.
He has taken a bag of money with him.
At the full moon, he will come home.
With her many persuasions, she entices him with her flattering lips.
She seduces him.
Now, from these verses, we can find several characteristics, discover many characteristics that are found in the world.
This woman acts in the same way that the world does toward us.
In verse 10, the world's outward appearance hides its inner reality.
Okay?
She's dressed up really nice.
Maybe she looks very attractive, but she's actually very, very dangerous.
And though the outside may appear beautiful inside, there's moral rot inside.
She stinks inside.
She's ugly.
Also, she is cunning.
She's cunning of heart.
Young people
Um, the world is very cunning, very wise in a shrewd and evil way.
Now some of you young people, you think you're so smart.
You think you know so much about the world.
Do you think you know more than your parents about the world?
I mean, how could they know they're old?
Well, it's just the opposite.
You're no match for the world and the world can take you and deceive you and change you and ruin you.
And the reason why your parents are the way they are is because they realize something you don't.
The world is an extraordinarily dangerous place that has ruined many young people like you.
Also, the world hides its true intent.
Again, remember, she looks wonderful on the outside, but on the inside, she's right.
Also, she comes to the young man,
just like the world will come to you as though she really, really cared about him.
The world will come to you like it really, really cares about you.
But in reality, all it wants to do is use you.
Verse 11, she is boisterous and rebellious.
Her feet do not remain at home.
The world is boisterous.
It's full of noise, full of conflict, full of, well, just
People who have no peace.
People who are always at odds with one another.
The world is like a sea, the Bible says, churning and bringing up all the filth from the bottom.
Do you see?
Also, she's rebellious, verse 11.
It says, her feet do not remain at home.
Well, let's read the whole thing.
When your parents come to you and they want to explain things to you, when they want to give you a command or a direction, how does your heart respond?
Do you think to yourself, what a blessing.
I have parents that care enough about me to give me guidelines and parameters to build fences of protection around me.
Do you appreciate them for that?
Or do you get angry?
Is your heart like the heart of the world?
Is your heart like the heart of this woman?
Whenever anybody tells you something to do, you want to do just the opposite.
Also in verse 11, it says, her feet do not remain at home.
What does that mean?
She's always discontent.
She's never satisfied.
She's always seeking for something new.
One of the greatest evidences that you are becoming mature in Christ is that you're content.
You're happy.
You're satisfied.
No matter what your circumstance is, why?
because all your delight comes from him.
And he's the same yesterday, today, and forever.
In verse 12 and 13, she is now in the streets, now in the squares and lurks by every corner.
So she seizes him and kisses him.
And with a brazen face, she says to him, what does all this mean?
The world is predatory.
Notice that she is in the streets and she's hunting
this young man.
It's not that she's just going to go over in a corner somewhere and be all by herself and do evil all by herself, but what she wants is to draw other people into that evil.
The world is the same way.
It's not content just to be over here doing what it wants to do and leaving you alone to follow Christ and follow righteousness.
That's not what's going to happen.
The world is predatory.
When it sees someone like you wanting to follow Christ, it wants to stop you, change you, turn you.
And if you won't turn, if you won't join them, ruin you.
Okay?
Also, look at verse 14.
I was due to offer peace offerings today.
I've paid my vows here.
This lady is wanting this young man to do something that is against the will of God while at the same time she claims to be religious.
The world is religious.
And there are many, many people who boast of being quite religious or even super spiritual, but the true test of whether or not your religion is correct.
is biblical is really a part of you is that you will know and submit to the will of God as it is revealed in the Scriptures.
Look at verse 15, therefore I've come out to meet you to seek your presence earnestly and I have found you.
What else does the world do?
It flatters you.
It makes you feel special.
I've come out.
I've been looking for you everywhere.
You're so important to me.
But that person who speaks that way, when the world comes to you that way, it's like a spider coming to a fly or a cougar to a deer or a hunter to an elk.
They're seeking you.
You're important to them, but just so that they can use you, devour you and ruin you.
Also 16 and 18, I've spread my couch with coverings, my colored linens of Egypt.
What does this mean?
Also for 17, I've sprinkled my bed with mirth and aloes and cinnamon.
The world beautifies sin.
She's decorated her room in order to bring that young man into her room and do things that are contrary to the will of God.
Here's one of the things you've got to see.
Sin will always appear, not only spiritual or religious, proper,
But it will present itself as something that is beautiful, something that is attractive, at least until it's too late.
You have to understand that the world's propaganda is absolutely marvelous.
But the reality is something quite different.
Let me give you an idea.
I was telling a young man one time we were going down the road and there was this huge billboard of, I think, a beautiful woman and she was drinking and drinking with other people and they seemed to be rather, you know, quite involved with drinking and partying and other things.
And I told that young man, I said, look at that.
That's a kind of a pretty and attractive picture, isn't it?
The problem is they don't show you the other side of the story.
If we could go behind the billboard and look, we would see all those people quite sick, quite ruined and at a loss.
Okay.
So the world beautifies sin.
Now we get to verse 19 and 20, for my husband is not at home.
He has gone on a long journey.
He has taken a bag of money with him at the full moon.
He will come home.
Now, what's going on here?
Well, we're going to get to it in the next lesson.
But what is really going on here is she saying, Hey, we can do this.
We can get ourselves involved in sin.
We can be contrary to the will of God, even contrary to the will of her husband.
And we won't get caught.
No one will see us.
My husband.
Who should be watching over me?
He's gone.
And so we can do anything we want and there will be no negative consequences.
We're going to see that that's just not true.
There are always consequences to sin.
And even though you escape the notice of everyone, you will never escape the notice of God.
Let's pray.
Father, I pray that you would use this as the warning in the life of so many young people that they would come to understand that this world is a dangerous place, that it is filled with people who would like to do nothing more than divert a Christian from walking in the will of God.
Please help them to see, Lord, help them to realize that it is truly a dangerous place and the only safe haven is in Christ and in obedience to His commands.
O Father, I pray for every young person who's listening, that you would protect them from the evil within them, but also Father, I pray that you would protect them from evil men and women,
and evil circumstances in this life.
Oh God, I pray that you would raise up a generation of young people who love you and who walk in integrity.
In Jesus name, amen.